...
We've now seen different uses of plots.
We've been mostly comparing orders of growth,
which we've seen before.
I wanted you to see the idea of how plotting
lets you visualize data.
And now I want to turn to a variation of that, which
is to think about, how can we actually use
that visualization of results to help guide computation, to help
guide the values of parameters we might want to pass in
or the kinds of things we want to explore inside
of a computation?
To do this, I want to use a simple little example.
Imagine you're planning a retirement.
You want to think about making sure you've
got enough money saved away so that you
can retire at the age you want.
Let's look at, basically, how a retirement fund grows
with compounding of interest.
And I'm going to do it with the following simple little
example.
I'm going to plan to set aside a particular amount.
Let's call it m every month out of my salary,
save it away in a retirement account.
I also expect that I'm going to earn a little interest in that.
I'm going to invest it in some stocks or bonds or C-Bills
or something else.
So I'm going to expect to earn a percentage
r of additional income every month
on the investments I set up.
And I want to explore, how big is my retirement fund going
to be when it compounds over time
with both new contributions each month and accrual of interest
each month so that I can decide when I want to retire?
How much do I need to have before I'm
ready to actually retire?
Let's look at how we might both write code to do that,
and especially how we can visualize
results to think about how I want to do that computation.
Well, let's start with just something that
computes compound interest.
I've written a little procedure here called Retire.
It takes in three arguments-- the amount
I'm going to put aside each month,
the rate at which I'm going to earn interest or, if you like,
grow my income through investments on it,
and how many months or terms I want to compute over,
how many terms do I want to look at before I'm
ready to look at retirement.
This function should not surprise you.
It does things you've seen before.
I'm going to set up a list called Savings.
I want to set up a list called The Base.
That's going to be my y and x values, if you like.
I'm going to compute the monthly rate.
That's just the annual rate, but every month, so
divide it by 12.
And then I have a simple little for loop here
that runs over the range of the number of terms,
so however many times I want to look at this.
And it just adds into each of those lists
the next label for the x-axis, so the next month.
And then the savings computation is a little bit different.
I take the value of savings the previous month,
and I add to it something that adds in the extra rate.
So it's multiplying by 1 plus the monthly rate, which says,
I've got the savings from last time,
plus I've got a little bit more because I've
earned a little bit more interest off of it.
And then to that updated value in my savings,
I add in the new monthly contribution.
I'm building up two lists, and I'm simply
going to return those-- a base list, which gives me
the x labels, if you like, and a savings list, which gives me
the y labels.
This shouldn't look surprising to you.
This is just a standard little accrual
of values in a list of a compound interest
plus a new contribution each month.
What I want to look at is, how do I visualize that?
So I'm going to use Retire to compute those two lists.
And notice, by the way, I'm returning both of them.
It's very nice.
I'm going to use that in a second.
Now I'd like to display that.
And I'm going to start by looking at something that's
going to display the different growths in retirement accounts
as I change how much I put aside each month.
I'm going to call this the display
retirement with monthlies.
It's going to take in an argument that
is a list of different amounts to set aside each month, a rate
and terms as before.
And I'm going to start setting up to do the plotting.
So I'm going to create a figure with a name.
I want to clear it, as I did before,
to make sure that in fact I'm going to be able to reuse it.
So I'm going to clear that out.
And then I'm going to run over a loop.
And the loop is going to, in that list of different monthly
values, select a new value and run Retire.
I'll remind you it said it returned two things.
So I'm going to get back out the x values and the y values.
And now I'm just going to plot them, just as I did before.
Great-- I'm going to plot x values and y values.
The one other thing I'm going to do
is I'm going to put in a nice label on here that actually
says, the label is, I'm retiring.
And I'm going to put in there what monthly
rate I was setting aside so I know how
to associate different graphs with the different amounts set
aside.
And when I'm done with all of that,
notice this is going to be a loop.
So I'm plotting different versions here.
When I'm done with all of that, I'm
going to put the legend up in the upper left corner.
Let's try it out.
I'm going to try it out with a monthly rate
of 5%-- nice and healthy.
I'm going to take 40 years of contributions.
So I've got 40 times 12, because I'm
plotting these at each month.
So that's the total number of terms.
And I'm going to look at what happens
when I decide to put different amounts aside
each month from $500 up to $1,100 each month.
And if I do that plot-- ah, nice.
Now, the legend is a little big here.
I stuck it in a corner where I know it would show up.
But the labels are valuable.
Because they tell me, how do I correspond each color
to the different graph?
And you see the growth, the exponential growth,
that you would expect here as I slowly
grow up each one of these different terms.
So I've got a set of graphs over here.
I can see what those differences are.
I might want to zero in on those a little bit
to look at some things about each one of those pieces
in order to decide which one is better for me.
And in particular, I can see the impact of increasing
the monthly contribution.
I get things that range from about $750,000 to almost $1
and 2/3 million as a monthly savings go from $500 to $1,100.
Again, my point was to look at, how do the visualizations help
me think about the computation?
This lets me see the range of growth
as I change the monthly component.
What's the effect of the rate of growth on the investments?
Well, I could do the same thing.
I could write another function, display retirement now
with rates.
And here, I'm going to give in a list of different rates.
I'm going to pick a particular monthly contribution.
I'm going to give it a set of terms to look at.
And the rest of this looks much like before.
Again, I'm going to put a label on here that lets me understand
what I'm capturing.
So notice it's got the string Retire.
It's got the monthly rate.
And I'm also going to put something
in here that tells me the actual rate of investment growth
so that I can associate each of those pieces with the graph.
I'm going to give it a particular argument.
I took something about in the middle, $800.
I'm going to give it three different ranges of growth
in terms of investment rate.
And again, I'm going to give it the same number of terms.
And now if I do the graph, I see that there's
a different variation in the exponential growth.
Here, varying the rate of growth of the investment return
actually tends to spread out more rapidly the actual graphs
that we see here.
But again, I can now start seeing the range of variation
here.
I can see that in fact if I can have something
with an aggressive growth-- and hoping for 7%
is probably being a little bit optimistic here--
I actually end up with a much better range in terms
of the total amount I've got in my retirement account
when I'm ready to retire-- sounds nice.
So here I can see the impact on a different dimension.
Now it goes from about $600,000 to almost $2.1 million.
OK, I want to look at both rates together.
What happens if I both think about,
I want to change how much I'm setting aside each month,
and, I'm going to be conservative or aggressive
in what I want to do in terms of my investments
to decide how to get growth in terms
of my actual overall retirement account?
So I can do both at the same time.
It's a little bit more messy code.
But you've seen both pieces of it.
Now I'm going to have a list of monthly rates.
I'm going to have a list of different rates in terms
of what I expect of the return on investment, saying,
am I conservative or aggressive in how I do all of this?
I'm going to set up a figure with an appropriate label
on it.
I'm going to clear it out.
I'm actually now going to zero in on just the high end
of the range.
And here I probably should have, rather than
giving it explicit values, looked at the range of terms
and set it up.
But I happen to know what I was going to use here.
So I'm just going to look at the last 10 years of investment
on these pieces.
So I'm going to literally separate out
the x limit on that.
Ah, notice-- previous examples I set the y limit.
Here I'm choosing the x limit, the x-axis,
and just zeroing in on one piece of it.
The last piece of it is I'm now going to loop twice.
I'm going to loop over how much to set aside each month.
And for each of those choices, I'm
going to loop over different rates of return.
As before, I'm going to set up a label.
And that label is going to help me out.
And now I'm going to look at four different monthly rates,
three different returns.
And let's see what happens when we do that graph.
And I should've said that.
I'm just going to focus on that last stage of the fund.
And if I do that, and I put on the appropriate label,
I get-- yuck.
Well, the labels help me here.
They tell me what's going on.
Zeroing in on just the last 10 years was probably valuable.
Because it lets me spread these out.
But it's a little hard to figure out which of these graphs
is corresponding to which color.
So I ought to be able to fix that so I can really see more
appropriately the comparison.
And I remind you, that was one of the points.
How do I use the visualization to help me decide how
to think about the computation?
Here there's too much overlay of the graphs.
How can I separate those out into pieces
that would really help me think about this a little bit better?
So let's do that.
I can't distinguish because of the overlap of the graphs.
I could just analyze them separately.
But I can also be careful about how
I want to visualize the different effects.
And I'm going to do that in the following way.
As before, I'm going to set up a graph,
clear it out, focus in on the last 10 years of all of this.
But I'm going to do a couple of other things.
The first one is I'm going to create a set of labels.
I'm going to create a set of monthly labels--
r, b, g, and k for red, blue, green, and black.
I'm going to set up a set of rate labels.
And I'm going to now use-- notice-- the color to tell me,
what was the monthly contribution?
And I'm going to use the style of display-- solid line,
circle, dash line, for example-- to tell me
how I want to actually visualize the different rates.
Inside of those loops, I'm going to select out
a month label by doing the following wonderful little
trick.
I pick out a monthly rate from that list of monthlies.
And to get that month label, I'm simply
going to take the remainder after dividing
by the number of those pieces to tell me which label to use.
So it's going to walk through the labels one at a time.
And if I have more choices than I have actual labels,
it will cycle back to the beginning.
But this is going to let me select out the label.
I'm going to do the same thing with the rate label.
I'm going to pick it using the remainder function so that I
cycle through those choices.
And then when I do the display, I
should get something that better separates out
the visualization.
So let's see if that actually happens.
I'm going to create that label by putting those two
pieces together.
Remember, to do the label, I need both a color and a style.
And so by putting those two pieces together as a string,
that's going to give me the piece I'd like.
And there we go.
This may still look messy to you.
But this is actually nice.
Because notice, the color all corresponds.
For example, red is all $500.
Blue is all $700.
So the color tells me very nicely,
what was the monthly rate?
And the style-- solid line, circle, dash line--
tells me whether it was a return of 3%, 5%, or 7%.
And while there's still a little bit
of overlay between these graphs, it's now easier
to see, what's the impact?
Which one has a bigger impact?
In fact, it's being more aggressive
about your investments that has the bigger impact.
Because that shifts things up much more rapidly
than basically how much I set aside each month.
You can see that the slant of the line,
if you like, up here with the three-- or the four, actually.
I should have done that right.
The four dash lines is much better
than the slant of the line down here with the four solid lines.
And that was my original point.
I want to be able to visualize and use the visualization
to guide the computation.
And this says, start saving early for retirement.
Because you really want to do that to get
that wonderful compound interest rather than relying on getting
a 25% return each year.
Because that suggests that somebody
has convinced you to invest in a Ponzi scheme,
and it's not a good idea.
Whatever you do for your own retirement, you get the idea.
I can visualize the data.
I can use that visualization to guide the computation.
And so that nicely leads to this summary.
It's now easier to see the grouping of the plots.
Color encodes, in this case, monthly contribution.
Format-- solid, circle, dash-- encodes the rate of growth
that I chose for the investment.
And more particularly, as you saw with this example,
I can interact between the plotting routine
and the computation to explore the data.
I can change the display range to zero in on a particular area
of interest.
In this case, it was the last 10 years.
I can change the set of values and visualize the effect.
And that then guides a new choice of values to explore.
What if I wanted to look at different rates of return?
What if I wanted to look at different monthly rates?
And finally, I could change the display parameters
to highlight how to cluster plots by parameter.
If you choose to take the second half of this course,
you're going to see lots of nice examples of using plotting
to visualize data to think about what
it says about a computation.
But we also wanted you to see an example of using a library.
And notice throughout this entire lecture, all I did
was use a set of functions so I could look up inside of PiLab.
That lets me rely on somebody having written code I can use
and using that library, a tool you're
going to use a lot as you move on in your own computation.
