...
We just saw an example where we could
have multiple recursive calls inside the body of a function.
Perfectly fine.
I want to show you a different example now
in which we could have multiple base cases inside of a problem.
And for this I'm going to use another classical problem
called Fibonacci numbers.
And here's the story behind Fibonacci.
Leonardo of Pisa, also known as Fibonacci,
posed the following challenge-- he
said imagine I put a newborn pair of rabbits, one female,
one male, in a pen or an enclosure.
And I'm going to assume that rabbits mate at age one month
and that rabbits have a one month gestational period.
That is they produce a new pair, the female produces a new pair
at the end of a month.
He's also going to assume that rabbits never die
and that the female always produces one new pair, one
male and one female, every month from its second month on.
And Fibonacci wanted to know how many female rabbits are there
at the end of one year?
So let's do a little simulation of this
and then we'll figure out how to actually solve it.
So we start off with a pair of immature rabbits, a male
and a female, first month.
At the end of one month they've matured.
They can therefore mate and at the end of the next month
they're still around, but they've
produced offspring, another male and a female.
At the end of the next month the original pair
have produced another pair of offspring
and the first pair of offspring have matured.
And that means that at end of the next month
both sets of mature rabbits now produce offspring
and another one is matured.
And that keeps happening as we start
generating more rabbits and more rabbits and more rabbits
until we're overrun with rabbits.
Question is-- could I model this to deduce
how many female rabbits are there at the end of a year, two
years, five years?
And when will Australia completely get
overwhelmed with rabbits, just to take an example of a place
with too many rabbits.
So what does this say?
I've got a little sequence here.
In fact, they're known as the Fibonacci numbers, in which I
have the following property-- at the end of one month I've
got one female.
At the end of the second month I've
also got one female, that's now pregnant.
At the end of the third month I've
got two females, one pregnant, one not.
And in general, at n months I've got however
many females there were the previous time
and I've also got however many females
there were two months ago.
Why?
Because every female alive at month n minus 2
will have produced one new female in month n,
and those can be added to the number that
were alive in month n minus 1 to get the total that
were alive in month n.
So there is basically the definition
of Fibonacci numbers.
And how do I capture that in code?
Well here I've got two base cases.
I've got how many females at time
0, how many females at time 1.
And my recursive case notice involves two invocations
of that function-- one for n minus 1 and one for n minus 2.
And if I want to turn that into code, there it is.
I've got two bass cases.
I'm doing it in one test, but I'm
saying if x is either equal to 0 or x is equal to 1, return 1.
Otherwise return fib of x minus 1 plus fib of x minus 2.
And if I were to run that, I can see that I can actually
compute Fibonacci given fib.
I can check that my base cases work- fib of 0
gives me 1 fib of 1 gives me 1.
And just a couple of trials, fib of 2
should give me the sum of those.
And fib of 3 should give me the sum of those.
And fib of 4 should give me the sum of those.
And you can see, in fact, it is doing
what I expected it would do.
Here's a case where I've got two base cases.
And in fact, I kind of know I need it
because my return here in the general case
needs two different invocations of that function.
And I need two base cases to make sure
that I can settle that out.
